Major refactor to focus on three protocol variants: OPRF, VOPRF, and POPRF (#304)
cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-voprf: draft-irtf-cfrg-voprf.md

### Proof Verification

Verifying a proof is done with the `VerifyProof` function, defined below.
This function takes four Elements, A, B, C, and D, along with a Proof value
output from `GenerateProof`. It outputs a single boolean value indicating whether
or not the proof is valid for the given DLEQ inputs.

~~~
VerifyProof

Input:

  Element A
  Element B
  Element C
  Element D
  Proof proof

Output:

  boolean verified

Errors: DeserializeError

def VerifyProof(A, B, C, D, proof):
  Cs = [C]
  Ds = [D]

  (M, Z) = ComputeComposites(B, Cs, Ds)
  c = GG.DeserializeScalar(proof.c)
  s = GG.DeserializeScalar(proof.s)

  t2 = ((s * A) + (c * B))
  t3 = ((s * M) + (c * Z))

  Bm = GG.SerializeElement(B)
  a0 = GG.SerializeElement(M)
  a1 = GG.SerializeElement(Z)
  a2 = GG.SerializeElement(t2)
  a3 = GG.SerializeElement(t3)

  challengeDST = "Challenge-" || contextString
  h2Input = I2OSP(len(Bm), 2) || Bm ||
            I2OSP(len(a0), 2) || a0 ||
            I2OSP(len(a1), 2) || a1 ||
            I2OSP(len(a2), 2) || a2 ||
            I2OSP(len(a3), 2) || a3 ||
            I2OSP(len(challengeDST), 2) || challengeDST

  expectedC = GG.HashToScalar(h2Input)

>   return CT_EQUAL(expectedC, c)

Author: ```suggestion
  return expectedC == c
```

>   return CT_EQUAL(expectedC, c)

Author: proof.c is a byte string, whereas expectedC is a scalar. I'll just make this `==`.

~~~

The definition of `ComputeComposites` is given below. This function is

> used both on generation and verification of the proof.

Author: ```suggestion
used both for verification of the proof.
```

> The definition of `ComputeComposites` is given below. This function is
> used both on generation and verification of the proof.

Author: ```suggestion
The definition of `ComputeComposites` is given below.
```

verifiable mode, and partially-oblivious mode -- with the following properties.

In the base mode, a client and server interact to compute `output = F(skS, input)`,
where `input` is the client's private input, `skS` is the server's private key,
and `output` is the OPRF output. The client learns `output` and the server learns nothing.
This interaction is shown below.

~~~
    Client                                              Server(skS)
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  blind, blindedElement = Blind(input)

                             blindedElement
                               ---------->

                      evaluatedElement = Evaluate(blindedElement)

                             evaluatedElement
                               <----------

  output = Finalize(input, blind, evaluatedElement, blindedElement)
~~~
{: #fig-oprf title="OPRF protocol overview"}

In the verifiable mode, the client additionally receives proof that the server used `skS` in
computing the function. To achieve verifiability, as in the original work of {{JKK14}}, the
server provides a zero-knowledge proof that the key provided as input by the server in

> the `Evaluate` function is the same key as it used to produce their public key.

Author: ```suggestion
the `Evaluate` function is the same private key corresponding to the server's public key.
```

                      evaluatedElement = Evaluate(blindedElement)

                             evaluatedElement
                               <----------

  output = Finalize(input, blind, evaluatedElement, blindedElement)
~~~
{: #fig-oprf title="OPRF protocol overview"}

In the verifiable mode, the client additionally receives proof that the server used `skS` in
computing the function. To achieve verifiability, as in the original work of {{JKK14}}, the
server provides a zero-knowledge proof that the key provided as input by the server in
the `Evaluate` function is the same key as it used to produce their public key.
This proof does not reveal the server's private key to the client. This interaction
is shown below.

~~~
    Client(pkS)                                     Server(skS, pkS)
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  blind, blindedElement = Blind(input)

                             blindedElement
                               ---------->

               evaluatedElement, proof = Evaluate(blindedElement)

                         evaluatedElement, proof
                               <----------

>   output = Finalize(input, blind, evaluatedElement, blindedElement, proof)

Author: I omitted these from all functions here and assumed they're implicit, since they're provided during context creation.

or suite. Each ciphersuite is identified with a two-byte value, referred
to as `suiteID`; see {{ciphersuites}} for the registry of initial values.

## Offline Context Setup {#offline}

In the offline setup phase, both the client and server create a context used
for executing the online phase of the protocol. The key pair (`skS`, `pkS`)
should be generated by calling either `GenerateKeyPair` or `DeriveKeyPair`.
Additionally, they agree on a ciphersuite value `suiteID`.

The OPRF variant server and client contexts are created as follows:

~~~
def SetupOPRFServer(suiteID, skS):
  contextString =
    "VOPRF08-" || I2OSP(modeOPRF, 1) || I2OSP(suiteID, 2)
  return OPRFServerContext(contextString, skS)

def SetupOPRFClient(suiteID):
  contextString =
    "VOPRF08-" || I2OSP(modeOPRF, 1) || I2OSP(suiteID, 2)
  return OPRFClientContext(contextString)
~~~

The VOPRF variant server and client contexts are created as follows:

~~~
def SetupVOPRFServer(suiteID, skS, pkS):
  contextString =
    "VOPRF08-" || I2OSP(modeVOPRF, 1) || I2OSP(suiteID, 2)
  return VOPRFServerContext(contextString, skS)

def SetupVOPRFClient(suiteID, pkS):
  contextString =

>     "VOPRF08-" || I2OSP(modeVOPRF, 1) || I2OSP(suiteID, 2)

Author: The purpose of these setup functions is to create the context string and then the context used for the online portion of the protocol, so I think it's better as-is. But your comment wasn't really clear to me, so maybe I'm missing your point?

>     "VOPRF08-" || I2OSP(modeVOPRF, 1) || I2OSP(suiteID, 2)

Author: I don't think that's an improvement in clarity. In any case, it's editorial, so I think we can resolve this.

>     "VOPRF08-" || I2OSP(modeVOPRF, 1) || I2OSP(suiteID, 2)

Reviewer: I agree with @armfazh, and to me, it reads more clearly :)

>     "VOPRF08-" || I2OSP(modeVOPRF, 1) || I2OSP(suiteID, 2)

Author: Fair enough -- done!

using the `Finalize` function described below.

~~~
Finalize

Input:

  PrivateInput input
  Scalar blind
  SerializedElement evaluatedElement

Output:

  opaque output[Nh]

Errors: DeserializeError

def Finalize(input, blind, evaluatedElement):
  Z = GG.DeserializeElement(evaluatedElement)
  N = blind^(-1) * Z
  unblindedElement = GG.SerializeElement(N)

  finalizeDST = "Finalize"
  hashInput = I2OSP(len(input), 2) || input ||
              I2OSP(len(unblindedElement), 2) || unblindedElement ||
              I2OSP(len(finalizeDST), 2) || finalizeDST
  return Hash(hashInput)
~~~

### VOPRF Protocol {#voprf}

The VOPRF protocol begins with the client blinding its input, using the same
`Blind` function as in {{oprf}}. Clients store the output `blind` locally
and send `blindedElement` to the server for evaluation. Upon receipt,
servers compute an evaluated element and DLEQ proof using the following
`Evaluate` function.

~~~
Evaluate

Input:

  SerializedElement blindedElement

Output:

  SerializedElement evaluatedElement
  Proof proof

Errors: DeserializeError

def Evaluate(blindedElement):
  R = GG.DeserializeElement(blindedElement)
  Z = skS * R

>   proof = GenerateProof(skS, G, pkS, R, Z)

Reviewer: R and Z and inverted compared to the POPRF mode. Is that intentional?

>   proof = GenerateProof(skS, G, pkS, R, Z)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  proof = GenerateProof(skS, G, pkS, Z, R)
```

>   proof = GenerateProof(skS, G, pkS, R, Z)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  proof = GenerateProof(skS, G, pkS, R, Z)
```
```suggestion
  proof = GenerateProof(skS, G, pkS, Z, R)
```

  evaluatedElement = GG.SerializeElement(Z)
  return evaluatedElement, proof
~~~

The server sends both `evaluatedElement` and `proof` back to the client.
Upon receipt, the client completes the VOPRF computation using the
`Finalize` function below.

~~~
Finalize

Input:

  PrivateInput input
  Scalar blind
  SerializedElement evaluatedElement
  SerializedElement blindedElement
  Proof proof

Output:

  opaque output[Nh]

Errors: DeserializeError, VerifyError

def Finalize(input, blind, evaluatedElement, blindedElement, proof):
  R = GG.DeserializeElement(blindedElement)
  Z = GG.DeserializeElement(evaluatedElement)

>   if VerifyProof(G, pkS, R, Z, proof) == false:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if VerifyProof(G, pkS, Z, R, proof) == false:
```

servers may batch multiple client inputs to `Evaluate`.

Upon receipt of `evaluatedElement`, clients complete the OPRF evaluation
using the `Finalize` function described below.

~~~
Finalize

Input:

  PrivateInput input
  Scalar blind
  SerializedElement evaluatedElement

Output:

  opaque output[Nh]

Errors: DeserializeError

def Finalize(input, blind, evaluatedElement):
  Z = GG.DeserializeElement(evaluatedElement)
  N = blind^(-1) * Z
  unblindedElement = GG.SerializeElement(N)

  finalizeDST = "Finalize-" || contextString
  hashInput = I2OSP(len(input), 2) || input ||
              I2OSP(len(unblindedElement), 2) || unblindedElement ||
              I2OSP(len(finalizeDST), 2) || finalizeDST
  return Hash(hashInput)
~~~

### VOPRF Protocol {#voprf}

The VOPRF protocol begins with the client blinding its input, using the same
`Blind` function as in {{oprf}}. Clients store the output `blind` locally
and send `blindedElement` to the server for evaluation. Upon receipt,
servers compute an evaluated element and DLEQ proof using the following
`Evaluate` function.

~~~
Evaluate

Input:

  SerializedElement blindedElement

Output:

  SerializedElement evaluatedElement
  Proof proof

> Errors: DeserializeError, InverseError

Author: ```suggestion
Errors: DeserializeError
```

servers may batch multiple client inputs to `Evaluate`.

Upon receipt of `evaluatedElement`, clients complete the OPRF evaluation
using the `Finalize` function described below.

~~~
Finalize

Input:

  PrivateInput input
  Scalar blind
  SerializedElement evaluatedElement

Output:

  opaque output[Nh]

Errors: DeserializeError

def Finalize(input, blind, evaluatedElement):
  Z = GG.DeserializeElement(evaluatedElement)
  N = blind^(-1) * Z
  unblindedElement = GG.SerializeElement(N)

  finalizeDST = "Finalize-" || contextString
  hashInput = I2OSP(len(input), 2) || input ||
              I2OSP(len(unblindedElement), 2) || unblindedElement ||
              I2OSP(len(finalizeDST), 2) || finalizeDST
  return Hash(hashInput)
~~~

### VOPRF Protocol {#voprf}

The VOPRF protocol begins with the client blinding its input, using the same
`Blind` function as in {{oprf}}. Clients store the output `blind` locally
and send `blindedElement` to the server for evaluation. Upon receipt,
servers compute an evaluated element and DLEQ proof using the following
`Evaluate` function.

~~~
Evaluate

Input:

  SerializedElement blindedElement

Output:

  SerializedElement evaluatedElement
  Proof proof

> Errors: DeserializeError, InverseError

Author: Yep, copy pasta. Thanks.

Errors: DeserializeError, InverseError

def VerifiableUnblind(blind, evaluatedElement, blindedElement, pkS, proof, info):
def Evaluate(blindedElement, info):
  R = GG.DeserializeElement(blindedElement)
  context = "Context-" || contextString ||
            I2OSP(len(info), 2) || info
  m = GG.HashToScalar(context)
  t = skS + m
  if t == 0:
      raise InverseError
  Z = t^(-1) * R

  R = GG.DeserializeElement(blindedElement)
  Z = GG.DeserializeElement(evaluatedElement)

  T = ScalarBaseMult(m)
  U = T + pkS
  if VerifyProof(G, U, Z, R, proof) == false:
    raise VerifyError

  N = blind^(-1) * Z
  unblindedElement = GG.SerializeElement(N)

  return unblindedElement
  U = ScalarBaseMult(t)
  proof = GenerateProof(t, G, U, Z, R)
  evaluatedElement = GG.SerializeElement(Z)
  return evaluatedElement, proof
~~~

#### Verifiable Finalize {#verifiable-finalize}
The server sends both `evaluatedElement` and `proof` back to the client.
Upon receipt, the client completes the VOPRF computation using the
`Finalize` function below.

~~~
Finalize

Input:

  PrivateInput input
  Scalar blind
  SerializedElement evaluatedElement
  SerializedElement blindedElement

>   Element pkS

Author: Pulled from the context, and described in a comment at the top of the {{online}} section.

Additionally, for the VOPRF and POPRF protocol variants, there is an additional
security property:

- Verifiable: The client must only complete execution of the protocol if
  it can successfully assert that the POPRF output it computes is
  correct. This is taken with respect to the POPRF key held by the
  server.

Any VOPRF or POPRF that satisfies the 'verifiable' security property is known
as 'verifiable'. In practice, the notion of verifiability requires that
the server commits to the key before the actual protocol execution takes
place. Then the client verifies that the server has used the key in the
protocol using this commitment. In the following, we may also refer to this
commitment as a public key.

## Cryptographic Security {#cryptanalysis}

Below, we discuss the cryptographic security of each protocol variant
from {{protocol}}, relative to the necessary cryptographic assumptions
that need to be made.

### OPRF and VOPRF Assumptions

The OPRF and VOPRF protocol variants in this document are based on {{JKK14}}.
In fact, the VOPRF construction is identical to the {{JKK14}} construction, except
that this document supports batching so that multiple evaluations can happen

> at once whilst only constructing one NIZK proof object. This is enabled using

Author: ```suggestion
at once whilst only constructing one proof object. This is enabled using
```

not be able to link any particular POPRF evaluation to x. This property is
also known as unlinkability {{DGSTV18}}.

Additionally, for the VOPRF and POPRF protocol variants, there is an additional
security property:

- Verifiable: The client must only complete execution of the protocol if
  it can successfully assert that the POPRF output it computes is
  correct. This is taken with respect to the POPRF key held by the
  server.

Any VOPRF or POPRF that satisfies the 'verifiable' security property is known
as 'verifiable'. In practice, the notion of verifiability requires that

> the server commits to the key before the actual protocol execution takes

Reviewer: Would it be clearer precising that "commitment" implies that the client has the server's public key before protocol execution?

Author: That's already the case. The client receives passes the public key in the context creation (offline) phase.

place. Then the client verifies that the server has used the key in the
protocol using this commitment. In the following, we may also refer to this
commitment as a public key.

## Cryptographic Security {#cryptanalysis}

Below, we discuss the cryptographic security of each protocol variant
from {{protocol}}, relative to the necessary cryptographic assumptions
that need to be made.

### OPRF and VOPRF Assumptions

The OPRF and VOPRF protocol variants in this document are based on {{JKK14}}.
In fact, the VOPRF construction is identical to the {{JKK14}} construction, except
that this document supports batching so that multiple evaluations can happen

> at once whilst only constructing one NIZK proof object. This is enabled using

Reviewer 2: not resolved yet
